In this video,
we're going to look at two
really versatile lookup functions
called the INDEX and the MATCH.
We are going to help Zara
finish over reconciliation.
But to begin with,
I'd like to start
with a slightly easier example.
So if you'd like to follow on,
please make sure you have
155 index match
examples opened up.
In this example, we
would like to look
up the population for Algeria.
If you have a look at
the population column,
you'll see the population for
Algeria is in the third position.
Now, this gives us a clue as to
how the INDEX function works.
If we come into
B4, we're going to
type "=IN" and tab.
The first argument
the INDEX function
requires is an array.
Now, this array can
be a column or a row,
so the INDEX function will work
both vertically and horizontally.
In this case, our array's
the population column,
and I've named it, so
we're just going to type
"pop" and tab to select.
Then we going to type a comma.
The next argument the INDEX
requires is a row number.
In other words, the
position within that array.
We can see that
Algeria's populations
is in the third position.
So I'm going to type a three
and press "Enter." Too easy.
There's our population
for Algeria.
So pretty straightforward really,
except one small problem.
If I come to Algeria and
I actually changed this,
so we going to drop down
the list, and I say,
actually I want the
population for Angola,
you'll see it's not changing,
and that's because I
actually typed the three in.
So obviously, we need a way of
automating the process of
determining the position.
What I want to do is take
the selected country
and match it into
my country data and return
the position at which
that country is found.
So in other words, I'd like
Angola to be found at position 5.
Now, the function
that can help us with
this is the MATCH function.
Click in to C4, I'm going to type
"=M" and Tab to MATCH.
Now, the MATCH is similar
to a VLOOKUP in a way,
in that the first thing it
wants is a lookup value.
Our lookup value, the
thing we're going to
use to MATCH is our country.
So click on A4 and type comma.
We then need to provide
it with a lookup array.
But unlike VLOOKUP,
with the MATCH,
it can only be a single
column or a single row.
But again, it can work
horizontally or vertically.
Here, we want to match it
into the country column,
and I've called it "ctry",
so I don't need to complete
with those counts,
and then I'm going to type comma.
The last thing we need
to provide is whether
it's range lookup
or an exact match.
Of course this is an exact match,
so we type zero and
then we press "Enter."
As we would expect, it's
found Angola at position 5.
So now all we need
to do is somehow
combine our MATCH with our INDEX,
and will show you
a really easy way.
I'm going to double-click
back into C4,
and select everything
except the equals,
and copy "Ctrl + C",
then press "Escape."
Then come back into
B4, double click,
and we're going to
replace this three,
so I'm going to delete it
with our MATCH, so paste,
"Ctrl + V". What will
happen now is the MATCH will look
up the appropriate row number,
and then the INDEX
will return the value
in that position in
the population column.
So when I press "Enter,"
there's my population for Angola,
and if I come to my country
selection and I choose Australia,
there's my population
for Australia.
So while the INDEX
and MATCH can work
independently and can even
be combined with other functions,
we do typically find
them working together.
But that's not all we can do.
The INDEX will actually
allow us to look
up in two directions
at the same time.
To demonstrate, can I ask you
to come to the next sheet,
which is called "Two"
Here we're going to
extend our example.
Previously, we only worried
about returning the population,
but it's possible we
could want to also
get back the capital
or the currency,
and you'll see I've actually
got this value on a
drop down as well.
So we don't have to just
get back population.
The thing though is
we now going to not
only have to determine
which row the values in,
but also which column.
So we're going to
need another MATCH.
Now, we've already
got a MATCH function
created for us in C4
returning our row number,
what we're going to
do is click into D4,
and we're going to type "=M"
and tab to start a second MATCH.
The lookup value this time is
the column header for the
value I want to get back.
So I'm going to click on
"Population" and type comma,
and then I'm going to match that
into my other column headings.
Again, this is an exact match,
and it will find capital position
1 and population in position 4.
So I press "Enter," and
there's my column number.
All that's left to
do is to create
the INDEX function that will
use this row number and
this column number.
So we're going to
click into B4 and
type "=IN" and tab.
Our array this time however,
is that whole block of data.
So I'm going to start
from B7 and drag to E7,
and then press "Ctrl + Shift +
Down Arrow" to select
all the values.
I'm just going to scroll
up so you can see what I'm doing,
and I'm going type the comma.
The next argument the INDEX
needs is the row number.
Now, we could type
the matching here,
but you don't have to if
you've got it sitting
in another cell, which we do.
So we're just going
to click into C4.
If you were only doing
a one-way lookup,
you only need to
provide two arguments.
But we doing two-way lookup,
so we're going to
need to give it that
column number as well.
So I'm going to type a comma,
and we've got our column
number calculated here.
So I'm going to click on
D4 and press "Enter."
So that's our
population for Algeria,
but if I come and change
population to be capital,
there's our capital for Algeria,
and if I click on Algeria and
change that to Australia,
there's our capital
for Australia.
So really powerful two-way lookup
there using an INDEX
with two MATCHes.
Now you understand
the principles.
Let's go and finish off
that reconciliation.
So I'm going to minimize this,
and we're back in our Recon.
Now, you may recall from
the last video that
there was just one problem left,
and that was this record,
where the amounts
paid according to
the supplier were different
to the one on our report.
Now, Zara looks at the data more
carefully and noticed that
this customer reference
number is actually
a duplicate of another,
which can't be right.
What she'd like to do is return
the correct reference
number from her system,
and she can do this by
matching the purchase
order number in
this report to the
purchase order number
in her MC report.
So she's going to
match the purchase
order number into this column,
and when she finds
it at this position,
she wants to get back the
appropriate payment reference.
She can't use VLOOKUP
to do this however,
because the purchase order number
is to the right of the
payment reference.
She can, however,
use an INDEX MATCH.
So that's exactly what
we're going to do.
That can also apply
in voice statement.
We're going to click into
V2 and we're going to
type "=IN" and Tab INDEX.
Our lookup array is
the payment reference
column on the other sheets,
we just going to type PAY,
Down Arrow twice and Tab,
because it's named, and comma.
But now we need to MATCH
our customer purchase
order number,
so I'm going to type "MA" and Tab.
I'm going to click
on the customer PO,
and I'm going to match that into
the purchase order column
in the other sheets.
So "PO" and Tab to
select PO number.
Don't forget to make
it exact, otherwise,
you get random wrong
results coming back.
Close the bracket for your MATCH,
close the bracket for your
INDEX, and press "Enter."
Zara was completely right.
The payment reference
should be 24674, not 673.
So we're just going
to come in here,
and replace that three with
a four and press "Enter."
It is now pulling back
the correct amount and everything
is balancing perfectly.
So we've seen how the
INDEX and MATCH can
solve problems that may be on
the lookup functions count.
There is a little bit of a
learning curve involved,
but the good news is we've given
you another great
practice challenged.
Go and practice all
these new skills.
So don't forget to check it out.